# Overview -- Sqlalchemy Documentation

## Overview

The SQLAlchemy SQL Toolkit and Object Relational Mapper is a comprehensive set of tools for working with databases and Python.
It has several distinct areas of functionality which can be used individually or combined together.
Its major components are illustated below, with component dependencies organized into layers.

- SQLAlchemy ORM
    * Object Relational Mapper(ORM)
- SQLAlchemy Core
    * Schema/Types
    * SQL Expression
    * Engine
    * Connection Polling
    * Dialect
- DBAPI

Above, the two most front-facing portions of SQLAlchemy are the **Object Relational Mapper** and the **SQL Expression Langurage**.
SQL Expressions can be used independently of tge ORM.
When using the ORM, the SQLAlchemy Expression language remains part of the public facing API as it is used within object-relational configurations and queries.

## Documentation Overview

The documentation is seperated into three sections： **SQLAlchemy ORM**, **SQLAlchemy Core**, and **Dialects**.

In **SQLAlchemy ORM**, the Object Relational Mapper is introduced and fully described. New users should begin with the Object Relational Tutorial.
If you want to work with higher-level SQL which is constructed automatically for you, as well as management of Python objects, proceed in this tutorial.

In **SQLAlchemy Core**, the breadth of SQLAlchemy's SQL and database integration and description services are documented, the core of which is the SQL Expression language.
The SQL Expression Language is a toolkit all its own, independent of the ORM package, which can be used to construct manipulate SQL expressions which can be programmatically constructed, modified, and executed, returning cursor-like result sets.
In contrast to the ORM's domain-centric mode of useage, the expression provides a schema-centric usage paradigm.
New Users should begin here with SQL Expression Language Tutorial.
SQLAlchemy engine, connection, and polling services are also described in SQLAlchemy Core.

In **Dialects**, reference documentation for all provided database and DBAPI backends is provided.

## Installation Guide

```bash
pip install sqlalchemy           # latest release version
pip install --pre sqlalchemy     # latest pre-release version
```

Disable C extensions

```bash
export DISABLE_SQLALCHEMY_CEXT=1;
python setup.py install
```

Checking the installed SQLAlchemy Version

```python
>>> import sqlalchemy
>>> sqlalchemy.__version__
1.2.0
```
