# Object Relational Tutorial

[TOC]

The SQLAlchemy Object Relational Mapper presents a menthod of associating user-defined Python classes with database tables, and instances of those classes(objects) with rows in their corresponding tables.
It includes a system that transparantly synchronizes all changes in state between objects and their related rows, called a unit of work, as well as a system for expressing database queries in terms of the user defined classes and their defined relationships between each other.

The ORM is in contrast to the SQLAlchemy Expression Language, upon which the ORM is constructed. Whereas the SQL Expression Language, introduced in SQL Expression Language Tutorial, presents a system of representing the primitive constructs of the relational database directly without opinion, the ORM presents a high level and abstracted pattern of usage, which itself is an example of applied usage of the Expression Language.

While thres is overlap among the usage patterns of the ORM and the Expression Language, the similarities are more superficial than they mat at first appear. One approaches the structure and content of data from the perspective of literal schema and SQL expression representations which are explicitly composed into messages consumed individually by the database.

A successful application may be constructed using the Ovbect Relational Mapper exclusively. In advanced situations, an application constructed with the ORM may make occasional usage of the Expression Language directly in certain areas where specific database interactions are required.

## Connecting

```python
>>> from sqlalchemy import create_engine
>>> engine = create_engine('sqlite:///:memory:', echo=True)
```

With `echo` enabled, we'll see all the generated SQL produced.

The return value of `create_engine()`is an instance of `Engine`, and it represents the core interface to the database, adapted through a dialect that handles the detail of the database and DBAPI in use.

The first time a method like Engine.execute() or Engine.connect() is called, the Engine establishes a real DBAPI connection to the database, which is then used to emit SQL.

When using the ORM, we typically don't use the Engine directly; instead, it's used behind the scenes by the ORM.

## Declare a Mapping

Classes mapped using the Declarative system are defined in terms of a base class which maintains a catalog of classes and tables relative to that base - this is known as the **declarative base class**. 
Our application will usually have just one instance of this base in a commonly imported module.

```python
from sqlalchemy.ext.declarative import declarative_base
Base = declarative_base()


class User(Base):

    __tablename__ = 'users'
    id = Column(Integer, primary_key=True)
    name = Column(String)
    fullname = Column(String)
    password = Column(String)

```

## Create a Schema

```python
Base.metadata.create_all(engine)
```

We can use `Metadata` to issue **CREATE TABLE** statement to the database for all tables that don't yet exist.

## Create an Instance of the Mapped Class

```python
ed_user = User(name='ed', fullname='Ed Jones', password='edspassword)
```

## Create a Session

The ORM's handle to the database is the `Session`.

```python
from sqlalchemy.orm import sessionmaker

Session = sessionmaker(bind=engine)
# or
Session = sessionmaker()
Session.configure(bind=engine)

session = Session()
```

The above Session is associated with our engine, but it hasn't opened any connections yet.
When it's first used, it retrieves a connection from a pool of connections maintained by the Engine, and holds onto it until we commit all changed and/or close the session object.

## Adding and Updating Objects

```python
ed_user = User(name='ed', fullname='Ed Jones', password='edspassword')
session.add(ed_user)
```

At this point, wo say that the instance is **pending**; no SQL has yet been issued and the object is not yet represented by a row in the database.
The `Session` will issue the SQL to persist `Ed Jones` as soon as is needed, using a process known as a **flush**.
If we query the database for `Ed Jones`, all pending information will first be flushed, and the query is issued immediately thereafter.

```python
>>> our_user = session.query(User).filter_by(name='ed').first() 
>>> ed_user is our_user
True
```

In fact, the `Session` has identified that the row returned is the **same** row as one already represented within its internal map of objecs, so we actually got back he identical instance as that we just added.

```python
>>> session.add_all([
...     User(name='wendy', fullname='Wendy Williams', password='foobar'),
...     User(name='mary', fullname='Mary Contrary', password='xxg527'),
...     User(name='fred', fullname='Fred Flinstone', password='blah')])
```

We can add more `User` objects at once using `add_all()`

```python
>>> ed_user.password = 'f8s7ccs'
>>> session.dirty
IdentitySet([<User(name='ed', fullname='Ed Jones', password='f8s7ccs')>])

>>> session.new  
IdentitySet([<User(name='wendy', fullname='Wendy Williams', password='foobar')>,
<User(name='mary', fullname='Mary Contrary', password='xxg527')>,
<User(name='fred', fullname='Fred Flinstone', password='blah')>])
```

The session is pay attention. It knows, for example, that `Ed Jones` has been modified, and that three new User objecs are pending.

```python
session.commit()
```

We tell the `Session` that we'd like to issue all remaining changes to the database and commit the transaction, which has been in progress throughout.
We do this via `commit()`,.
The `Session` emits the`UPDATE` statement for the password change on "ed", as well as `INSERT` statement for the three new User objects we've added.

`commit()` flushed the remaining changed to the database, and commits the transaction.
The connection resources referenced by the session are now returned to the connection pool.
Subsequent operations with this session will occur in a new transaction, which will again re-acquire connection resources when first needed.

## Rolling Back

Since the `Session` works within a transaction, ew can roll back changed made too.

```python
>>> ed_user.name = 'Edwardo'
>>> fake_user = User(name='fakeuser', fullname='Invalid', password='12345')
>>> session.add(fake_user)

>>> session.query(User).filter(User.name.in_(['Edwardo', 'fakeuser'])).all()
[<User(name='Edwardo', fullname='Ed Jones', password='f8s7ccs')>, <User(name='fakeuser', fullname='Invalid', password='12345')>]

>>> session.rollback()
SQL>>> ed_user.name
u'ed'
>>> fake_user in session
False
```

Rolling back, we can see that `ed_user`'s name is back to `ed`, and `fake_user` has been kicked out of session.

issuing a `SELECT` illustrates the changed made to the database:

```python
>>> session.query(User).filter(User.name.in_(['ed', 'fakeuser'])).all()
[<User(name='ed', fullname='Ed Jones', password='f8s7ccs')>]
```

## Querying

A `Query` object is created using the `query()` method on `Session`.
This function takes a variable number of arguments, which can be any combination of classes and class-instrumented descriptors.

When evaluated in an iterative context, the list of **`User` objects** present is returned:

```python
>>> for instance in session.query(User).order_by(User.id):
...     print(instance.name, instance.fullname)
ed Ed Jones
wendy Wendy Williams
mary Mary Contrary
fred Fred Flinstone
```

The `Query` also accepts ORM-instrumented descriptors as arguments. Any time multiple class entities or column-based entities are expressed as arguments to the `query()` function, the return result is expressed as **tuples**:

```python
for name, fullname in session.query(User.name, User.fullname):
    print (name, fullname)

for row in session.query(User, User.name).all():
    print(row.User, row.name)
```

The tuples returned by `Query` are named tuples, supplied by the `KeyedTuple` class, and can be treated much like an ordinary Python object.
The names are the same as the attribute's name for an attribute, and the class name for a class.

```python
for row in session.query(User.name.label('name_lebel)).all():
    print (row.name_label)
```

You can control the names of individual column expressions using the `label()` construct, which is available from any `ColumnElement`-derived object, as well as any class attribute which is mapped to one(such as `User.name`).

Basic operations with `Query` include issuing **LIMIT** and **OFFSET**, most convieniently using Python array slices and typically in conjunction with ORDER BY:

```python
for u in session.query(User).order_by(User.id)[1:3]:
    print(u)
```
this equals `LIMIT 2 OFFSET 1`.

```python
for name, in session.query(User.name).filter_by(fullname='Ed Jones'):
    print name
for name, in session.query(User.name).filter(User.fullname=='Ed Jones'):
    print name
```

Filtering results is accomplished either with `filter_by()`, which uses keyword argument. Or `filter()` which uses more flexible SQL expression language constructs.
These allow you to use regular Python operators with the classlevel attributes on your mapped class.

The `Query` object is fully **generative**, meaning that most method calls return a new `Query` object uponwhich further criteria may be added.
You can call filter `filter()` twice, which joins criteria using `AND`:

```python
session.query(User).filter(User.name=='ed').filter(User.fullname=='Ed Jones'
```

### Common Filter Operators

- `equals`:
    ```python
    query.filter(User.name=='ed)
    ```
- `not equals`:
    ```python
    query.filter(User.name!='ed)
    ```
- `like` and `ilike`(case-insensitive like):
    ```python
    query.filter(User.name.like('%ed%'))
    query.filter(User.name.ilike('%ed%'))
    ```
- `IN` and `NOT IN` :
    ```python
    query.filter(User.name.in_(['ed', 'wendy']))
    query.filter(~User.name.in_(['ed', 'wendy']))
    ```
- `IS NULL` and `IS NOT NULL`:
    ```python
    query.filter(User.name==None)
    query.filter(User.name!=None)
    ```
- `AND`:
    ```python
    from sqlalchemy import and_
    query.filter(add_(User.name=='ed', User.fullname=='Ed Jones'))
    query.filter(User.name=='ed', User.fullname=='Ed Jones')
    query.filter(User.name=='ed').filter(User.fullname=='Ed Jones')
    ```
- `OR`:
    ```python
    from sqlalchemy import or_
    query.filter(or_(User.name=='ed', User.name=='wendy'))
    ```
- `match`:
    ```python
    query.filter(User.name.match('wendy'))
    ```
    `match()` uses a database-specific `MATCH` or `CONTAINS` function;  its behavior will vary by backend and is not available on some backends such as SQLite.

### Returning Lists and Scalars

- `all()` returns a list
- `first()` applies a limit of one and returns the first result as a scalar
- `one()` fetches all rows, and if not exactly one object identity or composite row is present in the result, raise an error.
    ```python
    >>> user = query.one()
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    MultipleResultsFound: Multiple rows were found for one()

    >>> user = query.filter(User.id == 99).one()
    Traceback (most recent call last):
    ...
    NoResultFound: No row was found for one()
    ```
- `one_or_none()` is like `one()`, except that if no results are found, it doesn't raise an error; it just returns `None`. However, it does raise an error if multiple results are found.
- `scalar()` invoke the `one()` method, and upon success returns the first column of the row
    ```python
    >>> query = session.query(User.id).filter(User.name == 'ed').\
    ...    order_by(User.id)
    SQL>>> query.scalar()
    1
    ```

### Using Textual SQL

[Using Textual SQL](http://docs.sqlalchemy.org/en/latest/orm/tutorial.html#using-textual-sql)

```python
query(User).(text("id<224")).order_by(text("id"))

query(User).filter(text("id<:value and name=:name")).params(value=24, name='fred')

query(User).from_statement(text("SELECT * FROM users where name=:name")).params(name='ed')

stmt = text("SELECT name, id, fullname, password FROM users where name=:name")
stmt.columns(User.name, User.id, User.fullname, User.password)
query(User).from_statement(stmt).params(name='ed')

stmt = text("SELECT name, id FROM users where name=:name")
stmt = stmt.columns(User.name, User.id)
query(User.id, User.name).from_statement(stmt).params(name='ed')
```

### Counting

`Query` includes a convenience method for counting called `count()`:

```python
>>> query(User).filter(User.name.line('%ed')).count()
SELECT count(*) AS count_1
FROM (SELECT users.id AS users_id,
                users.name AS users_name,
                users.fullname AS users_fullname,
                users.password AS users_password
FROM users
WHERE users.name LIKE ?) AS anon_1
('%ed',)
```

the `count()` method is used to determine how many rows the SQL statement would return.
SQLAlchemy always places whatever we are querying into a subquery, then counts the rows from that.

In some cases this can be reduced to a simpler `SELECT count(*) FROM table`. We can specify the "count" function directly using the expression `func.count()`, available from the `func` construct.

```python
from sqlalchemy import func

>>>query(func.count(User.name), User.name).group_by(User.name)

>>> query(func.count(*)).select_from(User).scalar()
4

>>> query(func.count(User.id)).scalar()  # if id is the primary key
4
```


